[ZIP 302] Standardized Memo Field Format (#105)
zcash/zips: zip-0302.rst

  (which is therefore not a valid UTF-8 string), as specified in ZIP 302.

This ZIP refines the specification of the third case.

+ If the first byte (byte 0)'s value is 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader should:
     + strip any trailing zero bytes
     + decode it as UTF-8 (replacing any incorrect UTF-8-encoded byte sequences with the
       replacement character U+FFFD), and display it to the user as a human-readable
       string.

+ If byte 0's value is 0xF5, then:
     + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned varint/ULEB, and
       use it as an arbitrary application-defined "type" field.
     + Interpret the next bytes (1 to 2 of them) as a 16-bit unsigned ULEB, and use it as
       the length field.
     + If 1 + the number bytes used for the type field + the number of bytes used for the
       length field + the length > 512 then error out, i.e. do not do any further
       processing of the memo, and do not return any information about the memo to the
       caller other than the fact that it was incorrectly formatted.
     + Inspect the padding after the end of the indicated length, and if it contains

>        anything other than 0 bytes then error out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       anything other than bytes of value 0x00 then error out.
```

for the encoding of a memo field:

* a UTF-8 human-readable string [#UTF-8]_, padded by appending zero bytes; or
* the byte ``0xF6`` followed by 511 ``0x00`` bytes, indicating "no memo"; or
* any other sequence of 512 bytes starting with a byte value ``0xF5`` or greater (which is
  therefore not a valid UTF-8 string), as specified in ZIP 302.

This ZIP refines the specification of the third case.

The following specification constrains a party, called the "reader", that interprets the
contents of a memo. It does not define consensus requirements.

+ If the first byte (byte 0) has a value of 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader MUST:
     + strip any trailing zero bytes
     + decode it as a UTF-8 string (if decoding fails then report an error).

+ If the first byte has a value of 0xF5, then the reader MUST:
     + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned variable-length
       integer [#Bitcoin-CompactSize]_, and use it as an arbitrary application-defined
       "type" field.
     + Interpret the next bytes (1 to 2 of them) as a 16-bit unsigned ULEB, and use it as
       the length field. (The length can be at most 510 bytes due to the overall memo

>        length, and that is why the length field can only be 1 or 2 bytes.)

Reviewer: How does an implementer decide whether to take 1 or 2 bytes when parsing? Does that depend upon the value of the `type` field?

     + If 1 + the number bytes used for the type field + the number of bytes used for the

>        length field + the length > 512 then error out, i.e. do not do any further
>        processing of the memo, and do not return any information about the memo to the
>        caller other than the fact that it was incorrectly formatted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       length field + the length > 512 then report an error.
```

::

  ZIP: 302
  Title: Standardized Memo Field Format
  Owner: Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
  Original-Author: Jay Graber
  Status: Draft
  Category: Standards
  Created: 2017-02-08
  License: MIT

Abstract
========

This ZIP describes a proposed specification for a standardized format for clients who wish
to transmit or receive content within the encrypted memo field of shielded transactions.

Motivation
==========

> A well-defined standard for formatting content within the encrypted memo field would help
> expand the use cases by providing a structure for different types of data. Users and
> third-party services could benefit from a standardized formatting convention that defines
> the type and length of the data contained within.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A well-defined standard for formatting content within the encrypted memo field will help
expand its use within the Zcash ecosystem by providing a commonly recognized format for  
memo values carrying different types of data. Users and third-party services benefit from 
standardized formatting rules that define the type and length of the data contained within.
```

> A proposed common use case could be a standard encoding for sender’s preferred return
> address.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

::

  ZIP: 302
  Title: Standardized Memo Field Format

>   Owners: Jay Graber <jay@z.cash>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Owner: Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
  Original-Author: Jay Graber
```

  Status: Draft
  Category: Standards
  Created: 2017-02-08
  License: MIT

Abstract
========

This ZIP describes a proposed specification for a standardized format for displaying content within the encrypted memo field of shielded transactions.

Motivation
==========

A well-defined standard for formatting content within the encrypted memo field would help expand the use cases by providing a structure for different types of data. Users and third-party services could benefit from a standardized formatting convention that defines the type and length of the data contained within.

A proposed common use case could be a standard encoding for sender’s preferred return address.

Specification
===============

> This is a proposal to include the following memo field formatting conventions in the Zcash protocol specification:

Reviewer 2: As of version 2020.1.1 the protocol spec will defer to this ZIP.

```suggestion
Section 5.5 of the Zcash protocol specification [#protocol-notept]_ defines three cases
for the encoding of a memo field:

* a UTF-8 human-readable string [#Unicode]_, padded by appending zero bytes; or
* the byte ``0xF6`` followed by 511 ``0x00`` bytes, indicating "no memo"; or
* any other sequence of 512 bytes starting with a byte value ``0xF5`` or greater
  (which is therefore not a valid UTF-8 string), as specified in ZIP 302.

This ZIP refines the specification of the third case.
```

+ If the first byte (byte 0)'s value is 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader should:
     + strip any trailing zero bytes
     + decode it as UTF-8 (replacing any incorrect UTF-8-encoded byte sequences with the replacement character U+FFFD), and display it to the user as a human-readable string.
+ If byte 0's value is 0xF5, then:
     + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned varint/ULEB, and use it as an arbitrary application-defined "type" field.

>      + Interpret the next bytes (1 to 2 of them) as a 16-bit unsigned ULEB, and use it as the length field.

Reviewer 3: We should just use a 2-byte little-endian unsigned integer for the length field. There is no benefit to the variable-length encoding here, because the 1-byte length field will only occur for memo data at most 127 bytes, and the 2-byte encoding (either fixed or variable) will be necessary for any memo length near the 512-byte maximum where space optimisations might matter.

This draft ZIP has been up for a while, so there's a possible argument that someone may have already implemented this using the ULEB length field. I am unaware of any such implementation (`zcashd` certainly does not do so), and any associated use case should have been written up as a ZIP so that there was a corresponding allocated type. So I don't believe this is a problematic change, but I would be happy to see evidence to the contrary (e.g. link to an implementation).

Reviewer 3: Hmm, actually I see that `zmsg` implements this with varints for both. Oh well, I guess it's fine.

Reviewer 4: OK, we're going to leave the text as-is then.

  Category: Standards
  Created: 2017-02-08
  License: MIT

Abstract
========

This ZIP describes a proposed specification for a standardized format for displaying content within the encrypted memo field of shielded transactions.

Motivation
==========

A well-defined standard for formatting content within the encrypted memo field would help expand the use cases by providing a structure for different types of data. Users and third-party services could benefit from a standardized formatting convention that defines the type and length of the data contained within.

A proposed common use case could be a standard encoding for sender’s preferred return address.

Specification
===============

Section 5.5 of the Zcash protocol specification [#protocol-notept]_ defines three cases
for the encoding of a memo field:

* a UTF-8 human-readable string [#Unicode]_, padded by appending zero bytes; or
* the byte ``0xF6`` followed by 511 ``0x00`` bytes, indicating "no memo"; or
* any other sequence of 512 bytes starting with a byte value ``0xF5`` or greater
  (which is therefore not a valid UTF-8 string), as specified in ZIP 302.

This ZIP refines the specification of the third case.

> + If the first byte (byte 0)'s value is 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader should:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ If the first byte (byte 0)'s value is 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader MUST:
```

     + strip any trailing zero bytes

>      + decode it as UTF-8 (replacing any incorrect UTF-8-encoded byte sequences with the replacement character U+FFFD), and display it to the user as a human-readable string.

Reviewer 3: The trend in implementations is towards rejecting text memos that contain invalid UTF-8:
- The `Memo` struct in `zcash_primitives` has always [rejected invalid UTF-8](https://github.com/zcash/librustzcash/blob/8f087237123218b79b90537f08baf696bd295a09/zcash_primitives/src/note_encryption.rs#L112-L113).
- The `memoStr` field of the `z_viewtransaction` output is only returned by `zcashd` [if the memo is valid UTF-8](https://github.com/zcash/zcash/blob/35bb61be3900ff9d635de550c9efbe6b4ce96192/src/wallet/rpcwallet.cpp#L3748-L3750).
  - I made this decision consciously at the time, knowing it conflicted with this ZIP draft, but that relaxing the implemented conditions later was preferable to tightening them.
- I know @hdevalence wants `zebrad` to treat text memos with invalid UTF-8 as invalid, in order to have a typed memo representation that is 1:1 with the encrypted bytes.

I am leaning towards altering this ZIP to specify that invalid UTF-8 in text memos MUST be rejected, which implies that they would not be displayed to users, but the notes they are part of _would_ be treated as valid. Thoughts?

Currently in https://github.com/zcash/librustzcash/pull/177 I switch the `zcash_primitives` `Memo` struct to match this part of the ZIP draft, but I can easily revert that change.

Reviewer: It seems to me that zcashd/zebrad shouldn't be internally opinionated about the contents of the memo field, as it's not a consensus-level concern, right? The interpretation of the memo field is entirely a wallet or other end-user level concern, so while one may want to use a newtype internally, for any consensus-relevant code that newtype should just be a wrapper around 512 uninterpreted bytes.

Reviewer 4: @daira and I basically agree with @str4d here, consistency amongst implementations (not just on things pertaining to consensus) is a good thing.

Reviewer: Sure; my point is merely that the contents of the memo field aren't consensus-critical - by analogy, the implementation of this likely shouldn't be part of zcash_primitives, but instead zcash_client_backend. I want to avoid a situation where some combination of 512 bytes could result in parse failure. (As I understand it, this is *not* intended to be a change to consensus rules.) 

From an implementation perspective, I think it's important to understand the round-trip serialization semantics of each of the parsing functions. This is, as I said, an implementation detail - if decoding a memo with a leading byte <= 0xF4 results in invalid UTF-8 characters, this should not result in a parse failure, but simply that the memo be interpreted as undifferentiated bytes.

> + If byte 0's value is 0xF5, then:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ If byte 0's value is 0xF5, then the reader MUST:
```

>      + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned varint/ULEB, and use it as an arbitrary application-defined "type" field.

Reviewer 2: `unsigned varint/ULEB` is not defined; add a Terminology section and define it there, with a reference if needed.

>      + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned varint/ULEB, and use it as an arbitrary application-defined "type" field.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned variable-length integer [#Bitcoin-CompactSize]_, and use it as an arbitrary application-defined "type" field.
```

>      + Interpret the next bytes (1 to 2 of them) as a 16-bit unsigned ULEB, and use it as the length field.

Reviewer 2: Explain that the value of this field can be at most 510 due to the overall memo length, and that is why it can only be 1 or 2 bytes.

>      + Interpret the next bytes (1 to 2 of them) as a 16-bit unsigned ULEB, and use it as the length field.
>      + If 1 + the number bytes used for the type field + the number of bytes used for the length field + the length > 512 then error out, i.e. do not do any further processing of the memo, and do not return any information about the memo to the caller other than the fact that it was incorrectly formatted.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     + Interpret the next bytes (1 to 2 of them) as a 16-bit unsigned ULEB, and use it as the length field. (The length can be at most 510 bytes due to the overall memo length, and that is why the length field can only be 1 or 2 bytes.)
     + If 1 + the number bytes used for the type field + the number of bytes used for the length field + the length > 512 then error out, i.e. do not do any further processing of the memo, and do not return any information about the memo to the caller other than the fact that it was incorrectly formatted.
```

>      + Inspect the padding after the end of the indicated length, and if it contains anything other than 0 bytes then error out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     + Inspect the padding after the end of the indicated length, and if it contains anything other than bytes of value 0x00 then error out.
```

     + Return to the caller a 3-tuple of the following data:

>            + the type — an integer in [0…2⁶⁴)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           + the type — an integer in :math:`[0…2^{64})`
```

>            + the type — an integer in [0…2⁶⁴)
>            + the length — an integer in [0…510)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           + the type — an integer in :math:`[0...2^{64})`
           + the length — an integer in :math:`[0...510)`
```

           + a byte string of that length which contains the payload
+ If byte 0's value is 0xF6, then the user supplied no memo, and the encrypted memo field should be assumed to be empty.
+ If byte 0's value is between 0xF7 and 0xFE inclusive on both ends, then this memo is from the future, because first byte of 0xF7–0xFE are reserved for future specifications of this protocol.
+ If byte 0's value is 0xFF then the reader should not make any other assumption about the memo. If you want to put data into a memo field that doesn't use the type-length-value scheme above, then put 0xFF as the first byte, and then do whatever you want with the remaining 511 bytes.

See issue `#1849`_ for further discussion.

.. _`#1849`: https://github.com/zcash/zcash/issues/1849

Rationale
===========

> The new protocol specification is an improvement over the current memo field content specification in the protocol spec version 2016.0-beta-1.10 which currently states:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new protocol specification is an improvement over the current memo field content specification that was in the protocol spec up to version 2020.1.0, which stated:
```

    The usage of the memo field is by agreement between the sender and recipient of the note. The memo field SHOULD be encoded either as:

    • a UTF-8 human-readable string [Unicode], padded by appending zero bytes; or
    • an arbitrary sequence of 512 bytes starting with a byte value of 0xF5 or greater, which is therefore not a valid UTF-8 string.

    In the former case, wallet software is expected to strip any trailing zero bytes and then display the resulting UTF-8 string to the recipient user, where applicable. Incorrect UTF-8-encoded byte sequences should be displayed as replacement characters (U+FFFD).

    In the latter case, the contents of the memo field SHOULD NOT be displayed. A start byte of 0xF5 is reserved for use by automated software by private agreement. A start byte of 0xF6 or greater is reserved for use in future Zcash protocol extensions.

Backwards Compatibility
===========================

> Encrypted memo field contents sent without the standardized format proposed here will be interpreted according to the specification set out in older versions of the protocol spec.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Encrypted memo field contents sent without the standardized format proposed here will be interpreted according to the specification set out in older versions of the protocol spec.

References
==========

.. [#Bitcoin-CompactSize] `Variable length integer. Bitcoin Wiki <https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Protocol_documentation#Variable_length_integer>`_
```

::

  ZIP: 302
  Title: Standardized Memo Field Format
  Owner: Jack Grigg <jack@electriccoin.co>
  Original-Author: Jay Graber
  Status: Draft
  Category: Standards
  Created: 2017-02-08
  License: MIT

Abstract
========

> This ZIP describes a proposed specification for a standardized format for displaying content within the encrypted memo field of shielded transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ZIP describes a proposed specification for a standardized format for clients who wish to transmit or receive content within the encrypted memo field of shielded transactions.
```

Motivation
==========

A well-defined standard for formatting content within the encrypted memo field would help expand the use cases by providing a structure for different types of data. Users and third-party services could benefit from a standardized formatting convention that defines the type and length of the data contained within.

A proposed common use case could be a standard encoding for sender’s preferred return address.

Specification
===============

Section 5.5 of the Zcash protocol specification [#protocol-notept]_ defines three cases
for the encoding of a memo field:

* a UTF-8 human-readable string [#Unicode]_, padded by appending zero bytes; or
* the byte ``0xF6`` followed by 511 ``0x00`` bytes, indicating "no memo"; or
* any other sequence of 512 bytes starting with a byte value ``0xF5`` or greater
  (which is therefore not a valid UTF-8 string), as specified in ZIP 302.

This ZIP refines the specification of the third case.

> + If the first byte (byte 0)'s value is 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader MUST:

Reviewer 5: Nit: the apostrophe on `first byte (byte 0)'s` read a little awkwardly. Suggested tweak:

```suggestion
+ If the first byte (byte 0) has a value of 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader MUST:
```

> + If the first byte (byte 0) has a value of 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader MUST:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following specification constrains a party, called the "reader", that interprets
the contents of a memo. It does not define consensus requirements.

+ If the first byte (byte 0) has a value of 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader MUST:
```

     + strip any trailing zero bytes

>      + decode it as UTF-8 (replacing any incorrect UTF-8-encoded byte sequences with the replacement character U+FFFD), and display it to the user as a human-readable string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     + decode it as a UTF-8 string (if decoding fails then return an error).
```

> + If byte 0's value is 0xF5, then the reader MUST:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ If the first byte has a value of 0xF5, then the reader MUST:
```

     + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned variable-length integer [#Bitcoin-CompactSize]_, and use it as an arbitrary application-defined "type" field.
     + Interpret the next bytes (1 to 2 of them) as a 16-bit unsigned ULEB, and use it as the length field. (The length can be at most 510 bytes due to the overall memo length, and that is why the length field can only be 1 or 2 bytes.)

>      + If 1 + the number bytes used for the type field + the number of bytes used for the length field + the length > 512 then error out, i.e. do not do any further processing of the memo, and do not return any information about the memo to the caller other than the fact that it was incorrectly formatted.

Reviewer 5: Would it reduce complexity or simplify anything to strictly require that the length field always be 2 bytes? Because, in practice, whenever we use 1 byte the memo, by definition, it doesn't need the extra space. Conversely, when the memo is potentially maxing out the available bytes, we need two bytes ANYWAY to represent its length. In other words, leveraging a ULEB here doesn't seem to provide any savings.

Reviewer: I'm not sure that backwards compatibility with those implementations is necessarily something that justifies the complexity of CompactSize.

Reviewer 2: I prefer leaving this as it is; a CompactSize is not significantly more complicated.

>      + Inspect the padding after the end of the indicated length, and if it contains anything other than bytes of value 0x00 then error out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     + Inspect the padding after the end of the indicated length, and if it
       contains anything other than bytes of value 0x00 then report an error.
```

     + Return to the caller a 3-tuple of the following data:
           + the type — an integer in :math:`[0...2^{64})`
           + the length — an integer in :math:`[0...510)`
           + a byte string of that length which contains the payload

> + If byte 0's value is 0xF6, then the user supplied no memo, and the encrypted memo field should be assumed to be empty.
> + If byte 0's value is between 0xF7 and 0xFE inclusive on both ends, then this memo is from the future, because first byte of 0xF7–0xFE are reserved for future specifications of this protocol.
> + If byte 0's value is 0xFF then the reader should not make any other assumption about the memo. If you want to put data into a memo field that doesn't use the type-length-value scheme above, then put 0xFF as the first byte, and then do whatever you want with the remaining 511 bytes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ If the first byte has a value of 0xF6, then the user supplied no memo, and the
   encrypted memo field should be assumed to be empty.
+ If the first byte has a value between 0xF7 and 0xFE inclusive, then this memo
   is from the future, because first byte of 0xF7–0xFE are reserved for future
   specifications of this protocol.
+ If the first byte has a value of 0xFF then the reader should not make any
   other assumption about the memo. In order to put data into a memo field
   that does not use the type-length-value scheme above, the value of the
   first byte SHOULD be set to 0xFF; the remaining 511 bytes are then
   unconstrained.
```

contents of a memo. It does not define consensus requirements.

+ If the first byte (byte 0) has a value of 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader MUST:
     + strip any trailing zero bytes
     + decode it as a UTF-8 string (if decoding fails then report an error).

+ If the first byte has a value of 0xF5, then the reader MUST:
     + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned variable-length
       integer [#Bitcoin-CompactSize]_, and use it as an arbitrary application-defined
       "type" field.
     + Interpret the next 1 or 2 bytes as a CompactSize value constrained to the range 0..510, and use 
       the resulting value as the length of the remaining data.
     + If 1 + the number bytes used for the type field + the number of bytes used for the
       length field + the length > 512 then report an error.
     + Inspect the padding after the end of the indicated length, and if it
       contains anything other than bytes of value 0x00 then report an error.
     + Return to the caller a 3-tuple of the following data:
           + the type — an integer in :math:`[0...2^{64})`
           + the length — an integer in :math:`[0...510)`

>            + a byte string of that length that contains the payload

Reviewer 3: We should document prior to merging the ZIP draft that this is not agreed upon yet, due to incomplete discussion in https://github.com/zcash/zcash/issues/1849, so implementations should not assume any standard related to prefix `0xF5`.

Reviewer: Should we create a separate PR that adds this section, and remove it from this PR?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I prefer that; I'll make the change.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: I have now created the separate PR: https://github.com/zcash/zips/pull/638

>            + a byte string of that length which contains the payload

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           + a byte string of that length that contains the payload
```

> + If the first byte has a value of 0xF5, then the reader MUST:
>      + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned variable-length
>        integer [#Bitcoin-CompactSize]_, and use it as an arbitrary application-defined
>        "type" field.
>      + Interpret the next 1 or 2 bytes as a CompactSize value constrained to the range 0..510, and use 
>        the resulting value as the length of the remaining data.
>      + If 1 + the number bytes used for the type field + the number of bytes used for the
>        length field + the length > 512 then report an error.
>      + Inspect the padding after the end of the indicated length, and if it
>        contains anything other than bytes of value 0x00 then report an error.
>      + Return to the caller a 3-tuple of the following data:
>            + the type — an integer in :math:`[0...2^{64})`
>            + the length — an integer in :math:`[0...510)`
>            + a byte string of that length that contains the payload
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

+ If the first byte has a value of 0xF6, then the user supplied no memo, and the encrypted

>   memo field is to be treated as empty.

Reviewer 3: The protocol spec says that the "no memo" encoding is `0xF6 [0x00 0x00...]`, but this line defines it as `0xF6 [arbitrary]`. The latter is easier for light clients to analyze in simple cases (they can fetch the first byte to see if it is a plain text memo), but the former uses up less of the memo domain (and if we end up with structured memos that could contain text alongside other data, then light clients will just have to fetch the entire memo). [ZIP 244](https://zips.z.cash/zip-0244) also only commits to the entire memo, not its first byte. So I'm going to propose we alter this to match the protocol spec.

Reviewer 3: (In the past I felt the opposite way: have `0xF6` alone be the "no memo" indicator. But I'm now ambivalent.)

Reviewer: I'm in favor of the protocol encoding.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+ If the first byte has a value of 0xF6, and the remaining 511 bytes are 0x00, then the user
  supplied no memo, and the encrypted memo field is to be treated as empty.
```

> + If the first byte has a value between 0xF7 and 0xFE inclusive, then this memo is from
>   the future, because first byte values of 0xF7–0xFE are reserved for future
>   specifications of this protocol.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+ If the first byte has a value between 0xF7 and 0xFE inclusive, or 0xF6 with non-zero
  trailing bytes, then this memo is from the future, because these ranges are reserved
  for future specifications of this protocol.
```

Specification
===============

Section 5.5 of the Zcash protocol specification [#protocol]_ defines three cases
for the encoding of a memo field:

* a UTF-8 human-readable string [#UTF-8]_, padded by appending zero bytes; or
* the byte ``0xF6`` followed by 511 ``0x00`` bytes, indicating "no memo"; or
* any other sequence of 512 bytes starting with a byte value ``0xF5`` or greater (which is
  therefore not a valid UTF-8 string), as specified in ZIP 302.

This ZIP refines the specification of the third case.

The following specification constrains a party, called the "reader", that interprets the
contents of a memo. It does not define consensus requirements.

+ If the first byte (byte 0) has a value of 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader MUST:
     + strip any trailing zero bytes
     + decode it as a UTF-8 string (if decoding fails then report an error).

+ If the first byte has a value of 0xF5, then the reader MUST:
     + Interpret the next few bytes (1 to 9 of them) as a 64-bit unsigned variable-length
       integer [#Bitcoin-CompactSize]_, and use it as an arbitrary application-defined
       "type" field.

>      + Interpret the next bytes (1 to 2 of them) as a 16-bit unsigned ULEB, and use it as
>        the length field. (The length can be at most 510 bytes due to the overall memo
>        length, and that is why the length field can only be 1 or 2 bytes.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     +  Interpret the next 1 or 2 bytes as a CompactSize value constrained to the range 0..510, and use 
      the resulting value as the length of the remaining data.
```

Specification
===============

Section 5.5 of the Zcash protocol specification [#protocol]_ defines three cases
for the encoding of a memo field:

* a UTF-8 human-readable string [#UTF-8]_, padded by appending zero bytes; or
* the byte ``0xF6`` followed by 511 ``0x00`` bytes, indicating "no memo"; or
* any other sequence of 512 bytes starting with a byte value ``0xF5`` or greater (which is
  therefore not a valid UTF-8 string), as specified in ZIP 302.

This ZIP refines the specification of the third case.

The following specification constrains a party, called the "reader", that interprets the
contents of a memo. It does not define consensus requirements.

+ If the first byte (byte 0) has a value of 0xF4 or smaller, then the reader MUST:
     + strip any trailing zero bytes
     + decode it as a UTF-8 string (if decoding fails then report an error).

+ If the first byte has a value of 0xF6, and the remaining 511 bytes are 0x00, then the user
  supplied no memo, and the encrypted memo field is to be treated as empty.

+ If the memo matches any of these patterns, then this memo is from the future, because
  these ranges are reserved for future updates to this specification:

>   - The first byte has a value of 0xF5.
>   - The first byte has a value between 0xF7 and 0xFE inclusive.
>   - The first byte has a value of 0xF6, and the remaining 511 bytes are not all 0x00.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - The first byte has a value of 0xF5.
  - The first byte has a value of 0xF6, and the remaining 511 bytes are not all 0x00.
  - The first byte has a value between 0xF7 and 0xFE inclusive.
```

> + If the first byte has a value of 0xFF then the reader should not make any other
>   assumption about the memo. In order to put data into a memo field that does not use the
>   type-length-value scheme above, the value of the first byte SHOULD be set to 0xFF; the
>   remaining 511 bytes are then unconstrained.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+ If the first byte has a value of 0xFF then the reader should not make any other
  assumption about the memo. In order to put arbitrary data into a memo field (that
  might have some private non-standard structure), the value of the first byte SHOULD
  be set to 0xFF; the remaining 511 bytes are then unconstrained.
```
